Thank you.
Yeah.
Enough seats. Nope.
Massive thousands
you need.
All right. Good afternoon, minister.
Welcome along to the committee.
Pleasure to have you here with us and your team.
Uh, we have an hour
and a half sit down for this afternoon's hearing on the
appropriation for Vote Foreign Affairs.
Uh, just before we kick into action on this,
uh, we are live streaming.
I would like to acknowledge visiting delegation
from the Solomon Islands.
Just had the opportunity to meet them briefly
before you've joined us.
Minister. It's wonderful
to have them over here looking at scrutiny week
and action in our parliament this week.
I'm sure they'll have some wonderful stories to take back
to the Solemn Island.
So, as I said, we have an hour and a half sit down.
Uh, you will have received a copy of the, uh,
indicative agenda that we will, uh, use as a guide
for this afternoon's session, uh,
across a range of different areas.
We welcome your introductory comments
and then I'm sure there will be many questions from members
as we traverse those areas over the course of the afternoon.
Over to you.
Uh, well, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
And again, uh, welcome to the, uh,
guest from the Solomon Islands.
It's, uh, great that they'll have a chance to hopefully see,
uh, proper scrutiny of, uh, ministerial portfolio
and the taxpayer expenditure.
In the interest of brevity, I thought I might just hand out
my, uh, opening address rather than to read it to you, if
that's agreeable.
And then I'll introduce the team.
I've got on the sections of consideration
that are laid out in your agenda.
Okay. Alright. Thank you.
So, I'll give you a chance to have a look at that,
and you tell me when you're ready to hear who the team is,
who will be, uh, helping out in this, uh, committee hearing.
Very good. Thank you.
Okay. Look, so I've got Tahar McPherson on my right.
Um, the overview of appropriations.
I've got Lucy Duncan on my left
on Phase Diplomacy is your third section.
We've got Benal Patis
on International Development Corporation.
We've got behind us again,
Bernadette Kavanaugh on Antarctica, Victoria Hellman,
the others helping out are Graham Morton
and Paula Wilson here as well.
Excellent. Very good.
Alright, we'll dive straight into questions.
First question in the honorable opinion. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. And, uh, thank you minister. Uh, first, uh, comment.
Congratulations on a very busy travel schedule.
Uh, and I think as I read through your
introductory remarks here, if I may, uh, pick out, uh,
the point you make about the Pacific.
Uh, and we note, uh, in the budget
and acknowledge, uh, time limited funding around some
of the economic, uh, sorry, the climate challenges
and the security matters in the Pacific.
Uh, I wondered if you would like
to elaborate a little bit more with respect to, uh, the
seen impact of that funding
and why in the budget acknowledging it was time limited.
Uh, we haven't, uh, you haven't seen fit
or the government hasn't seen fit, sorry, to continue
to support those initiatives moving forward.
Well, usually initiatives of
that shape would've a time limit much more extended than
that was, uh, the case when we inherited it.
Mm-hmm. So it had a run out period, two years too early.
Uh, and so you can call any expression like fiscal cliff
and things like that there, but the answer is we were caught
by that, not for buses for
and having to find money for it in a very serious,
difficult time at, uh, whilst we were coval with that,
doing a review of our expenditure.
And so, uh, the, um, position that was made very,
very clear was that whilst the 2025 budget was there,
it was, uh, up for review in 2026
and further consideration earlier than you would think.
That's right. 'cause usually you'd step up
and be saying 2025, it means 2028, but that wasn't the case.
So, uh, we are still focused on that.
And, uh, looking at areas where, uh, resilience
and structural, uh,
objectives are probably more important.
We are caught with the fact that we are in the middle of,
uh, a change by the United States that
represents huge sums of money, uh, which requires us
to not, I'll say just accept the circumstance,
but look alongside Australia
and much wider for other countries
to help out in the Pacific because we believe that maybe,
and this is not a criticism of the past,
but, uh, we may have not have looked as wide
as we possibly could for partners mm-hmm.
To help out. They can only say no,
but if you don't ask them, the answer's always gonna be no.
So that's what we are trying to do,
extending much wider than people think around the world.
And some of the responses have been of genuine interest.
And, uh, we hope to, uh, take that from the, uh,
sort of, uh, early stages
of consideration to something real.
So without giving the details,
the prospects are better than the look on this current
budgetary circumstance in our view.
If I may supplementary Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Does that lend itself to the ongoing Pacific Reset
that I know you've spoken of in the past,
and the view that the Pacific Reset is seen as a good,
strong thing, uh, with respect
to the way New Zealand works in the Pacific?
With your answer in mind, does that lend itself
to tracking in the right direction
for the reset that you've let in chance?
Well, the reality is we have, uh,
been involved in a reset since 2018.
It's early in 2018,
but, uh, here we are in reconsidering the circumstances,
which even in that short place of time have
of late dramatically changed.
Mm-hmm. And as a consequence, um,
we have not finalized our considerations other than just say
that we are looking as wide as we possibly can
and how we might get a greater, uh, assistance to the, um,
blue continent, which is 31% of the world's surface.
Uh, but with other partners who, uh, even in the,
those restraint economic times
we believe are willing to help out.
Mm-hmm. Now, um, the,
the reset is the concept.
Yeah. Because it began a long time ago, in fact,
about 20 years ago when some of us thought,
hang on a minute, we're not paying enough
attention to our own backyard.
Mm-hmm. Or in our case, our front yard. Mm-hmm. Right.
So, getting to where we've got here from say,
the early nineties, it's been, uh,
an essential consideration.
We just need, though, to have a better understanding in our
political system that New Zealand should be
doing a whole lot more.
Mm-hmm. Uh,
and seeking it to achieve what was only achieved once in,
uh, the year 70, uh, two to 75
under Norman Kirk, which was upsetting at about 40, uh,
0.54%.
And we've got up to 0.35 in the past.
And, uh, here we are starting again to at least set out
to get a return to that.
Again, I wanna emphasize that I think we've got other people
who have prepared other countries prepared to help
where we should have engaged 'em earlier.
Very good.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you Minister, um, for your time today.
Uh, just noting your comments
and your opening remarks in regards
to New Zealand's response to the Israel Hamas, uh, conflict
and New Zealand's response in terms
of upholding international law,
including international humanitarian law.
And I did want to first acknowledge, um, the sound decision
that you made, minister, in terms
of imposing those recent travel bans.
Um, I wonder in terms of the forward looking approach,
given the escalating conflict we are seeing,
but also the really concerning restrictions around aid,
whether there's an opportunity within the budget lines
for New Zealand to reconsider joining South Africa's case
at the ICJ.
Um, just noting the multi-category budget line, um,
on page 97 of the appropriations does have
that additional allocation for advocacy.
So I'm wondering whether that might be the place
that it would sit.
Well, it depends on how you are interpreting legally
the South African case and its current adjudication.
The number of claims are being
made about it, which aren't true.
That's to its international finality,
if you grasp what I'm saying.
And in terms of the
Decision you raised, that's, I'm asking you
In terms of the decision being able
to constitute international law.
I think there, there could be some value in New Zealand, uh,
contributing some views in terms of whether the case
for genocide is made up,
But it's not constituting international
law at this point in time, is it?
Well, if you've got a different view, I'd like to hear it
because the troubles, the trouble
with too much in foreign affairs, sad to say, is
that people tell you what they want
to happen rather than what is happening.
Yeah. Thank you. Yeah. Our job is to find out
what is happening and be ultra cautiously in,
we're a small country long,
all long away from these circumstances being asked
to make all sorts of, uh, contributions when, as you know,
in our neighborhood, we've got huge demands.
We've got, and our own domestic population got huge demands.
And so getting the um, uh,
understanding correct is critical.
Can I document Thank you minister.
And perhaps, um, I could also ask another question in
relation to our efforts internationally.
I noted the decision for New Zealand
to attend the upcoming international conference on the two
two state solution in New York, which I think is,
is an extremely positive step for us to take.
Um, does that indicate that there is recognition that, uh,
or there's an understanding that recognizing Palestine now
could be a useful tool for peace if that were
to be done early?
Look, uh, across the political divide, this country has
agreed in supporting the two state solution.
So that's where we've got unity on.
The question you ask here is the difficulty.
This would be an acceptance of a state
of affairs that does not exist.
I've spoken to the Palestinian authority, I've spoken
to the Egyptians, I've spoken to Emirates,
to Jakarta, and I've spoken to a lot of players in this.
And so my colleagues and so my,
and so foreign affairs,
this would be setting a unique standard way below
that which we've always set.
And once having changed our standard, the call on that
for a lesser standard will be of f of a frequency
that we need to understand now.
And I say now whether we can accept that now
and rather than just make this a unique case,
'cause it will have ramifications.
We have always said, it's not a question of that, it's when,
but how do we establish who is to be that authority?
It's generally difficult question. Mm-hmm.
Steve Abel. Yeah. Thank you.
Just follow following on from that.
Um, even outside the question of recognizing the state
of the state of the Palestinians, recognizing the right
of the Palestinians that the people to exist,
I suppose is the challenge.
Um, and the ICJs advisory opinion on the 24th of July at
International Court of Justice declared
that the prolonged presence of Israel
and the whole of the Palestinian territory occupied since
1967, including the culinary regime, was unlawful,
aimed at annexation
and undermined the integrity
of the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian Territories and sought
to acquire sovereignty over an occupied territory.
And I guess the challenge is, you know,
the special rapport Rapporteur for Palestine, um, says
that she suggests that genocide should be seen
as an integral and instrumental in the aim
of full Israeli colonization
of Palestinian land while removing
as many Palestinians as possible.
Is, is there not a problem, minister, if we can't
acknowledge the intent of Israel to annexation, colonization
and genocide in this instance, does
that not affect our ability to trust, for example,
that Israel has genuine intent to feed the Palestinians?
Because it would seem to me that they go
to get food while starving
and it's a shooting galleries that would be more consistent
with an intent to genocide, which is what seems
to be obviously happening.
Are you answering question or you asking is number one.
Number two, the critical words you used at the start of
that was the advisory opinion.
Mm-hmm. Those words are critical
because it puts in context
the primary question I got from the first question,
'cause it's an advisory opinion, is not of the status
that you're asserting.
Sure. But do you have an opinion on it, minister?
Well, well, we've all got opinions,
but they have no good to anyone unless they've got value
Would, That's the restraint we should, we've all got
as a, because we don't, talking about Winston Peters or Mr.
Abel here, we're talking about a country called New Zealand.
That's right. Reputation. That's
Right. And so in
terms of New Zealand's reputation,
where we have clearly, um,
in our better moments stood against, uh, clear breaches
and atrocities and acts against the rule
of international law
and acts against human rights, are you comfortable
that we are doing sufficient in
that space when really it seems that we are caught up
with a desire to remain on side with an older
ally like the United States,
whilst they themselves are complicit in supporting
Israel's atrocities? Well,
Again, this is not a question, this is a statement you're
making by the way of the guise of a question. Well, I'm
Trying to ask, It's not for me. I'm
not, I'm just giving you my view,
so the chairman to decide that.
But I'm entitled to judge what I'm being, uh,
whether I'm being asked something or told someone.
Do you perceive it as a genocide, Mr.
Minister? Well, again, you know,
it's not my perception that matters.
It's what the respected international, uh,
legal opinion would be.
And that has not been arrived at in the way it was framed.
Okay. Alright. Tim Costley. Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, thanks minister for your time.
I, I'd like to reflect on some of your opening, uh, remarks
where you talk about the new mini lateral groupings and,
and hop on perhaps my old hobby horse of the IP four,
but New Zealand's relationship with Australia, uh, Japan,
South Korea, and that as a means of engaging with nato.
I know the Prime Minister's heading there next week.
Um, as part of that IP four meeting, I'd be interested,
given your ex extensive, um, uh,
work overseas over the last year to hear your reflections
on, on that and which other, maybe mini lateral,
as you described them, uh, groupings, uh,
of particular interest to New Zealand.
And secondly, uh, not just them as a means for us to engage
with a big organization like nato, but what that can mean
and challenges closer to home, whether
that's South China Sea, uh,
geostrategic competition in the Pacific and, and,
and how that, that helps us.
Well, you've heard the expression from small acorns,
great oak trees graph, but, uh,
a min later organizational structure finally led
to the comprehensive progressive TPPA.
That's what it finally led to.
But New Zealand was a very significant initiator of that
process into something far, far bigger,
and now proceed by some to being, uh, the, you know,
principle potential, um, economic cooperation arrangement
in the absence of other things at this present time.
So, uh, we are just saying
that we are looking everywhere we can possibly.
And, uh, a country like New Zealand is as driven
as it always was since a certain term voter book,
a book about the instability of a dependent economy.
And we're as unstable in that context as ever were.
And we've gotta work a whole lot harder than we ever have
to ensure that we survive in this world, um,
because no one answers a living.
Uh, we've gotta get out there and market
and sell ourselves as hard as we can go.
And it's starting to work.
And, and I wonder Minister Mitch, thank you.
Uh, um, I, I I think most Kiwis would understand
that we have longstanding relationships through our sort
of five eye partner countries, maybe even FPDA, but,
but I'm interested to see where, where, uh, you
or the ministry, um, through, through you are, are focusing.
Is it, are, are there other organizations like the IP four?
Is there other, uh, entities through Southeast Asia
where perhaps there hasn't been, uh, emphasis in the past,
but which presents opportunity in the future?
Yes. Um, answer that is
where we're looking at every opportunity we possibly can,
but certain constraints
and that those constraints are resources.
But I think we've imaged that, uh, over recent times.
All right. Any here today?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank you again, minister, going
by your comments and your introductory remarks there.
And the fact that as I examined the vote, uh,
for foreign affairs, there seems to be offsets
of some money's gone from here.
Now it's put to the focus on there.
Are you satisfied then that, uh, the budget as it's set out
for Vote Foreign Affairs will, uh,
achieve the desired outcomes that you've set for respect to,
uh, our foreign policy
and the role of foreign affairs, uh,
from here into the coming year?
Any minister foreign affairs is satisfied with their,
they not just not fit for the job.
That's A fact. Right? We just gotta get our country
to understand that there's modeling out there like, uh,
Singapore, like Ireland, like Croatia, modern Croatia,
and the full of communism there.
But it's dramatically, dramatically shown
that the investment in foreign affairs, trade utilities
and staff and capacity is a payoff in a big way.
That's been very hard to sell inside New Zealand.
We are just not learning the lessons of others
or in Singapore's case,
but we used to help under the Colombo plan go straight past
us with rational same economic policies
and investments that have had a huge return for them.
Mm-hmm. Thank you for that, Dan. Kira,
Thank you. Thank you,
minister. Um,
I acknowledge the e extensive travel
and work that you've done, um, in the past 18 months
to deliver a good foreign
affairs reputation for New Zealand.
I'm interested to know your views on, uh, how
that extensive work has impacted the reputation
of New Zealand as a global partner.
Um, that's an invitation to a modesty.
I mean, the world's gotta give you a comment on that,
but, uh, real, our real point is that in so many areas,
uh, restraint or economy
or um, modesty of engagement, it's not been good for us.
We just gotta go the extra mile and spend the extra time
and also understand how rapidly the world's changing.
And you can do it by Zoom
and you can do it by email, you can do it by phone.
So there's nothing like the old Pacific way face-to-face.
And, um, there's some of these, um, uh, uh, the,
the lessons we've learned from
that have been enormously engaging.
And you, you're talking
to somebody from Saudi Arabia's never seen anybody
and asking them to invest in your country,
and they think, uh, why?
And the answer is, well take the racing industry
and we've got less than 8% of the horses in Australia,
and we running almost 22%, 22% of the group won racists.
That prick up the interest at real big time. Yeah.
And when you say to em, I be the Melbourne Cup count times,
and I seen you guys,
you've never won the Melbourne Cup once you,
you bought now horses, maybe you start winning.
And there they're interested already said them in its bad
culture here, we've gotta market ourselves more.
That interest is also in the em, in in the Emirates as well.
So it goes in a lot of areas.
And then I suppose one shock to be in America one day,
seeing a person that used to be fronting, uh,
the America's most wanted
and he's selling of all things, something with a big name
green lip mussel from New Zealand.
And wonder why on earth is my country
not doing a whole lot more there?
'cause they've got anti cancerous properties.
That's why they're selling it. We're building the biggest
muscle power in the world, but where's our marketing?
So, you know, it's a total operation of yield habits
to come through your electorate, doesn't it?
Or very It does indeed. That's right. Indeed.
Well, I can see why you're taking interest.
I mean, but that's what we've gotta do.
And all of a sudden you'll start seeing, um, that the trade
ambitions you've got are starting to be met.
We are just not doing enough.
Thank you. Questions still under the first section?
Or did, did you wanna move on?
Where Is aid
Sort of transitioning between the third mine's on aid?
Oh, yeah. Okay. Well, we'll,
we'll wrap up the first section,
then we'll go onto the trading diplomacy piece,
and then we will you on
and the IDC piece, if you're happy with that.
Um, so under the trading diplomacy, first question. I
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, minister, there's been much talk about, uh,
the doubling of export, uh, for particular focus on India,
no prime minister's trade delegation, uh,
and the not too distant past.
Are you satisfied that the vote, uh,
and money allocation will bring about
any material?
Uh, uh, you call it material outcome?
Uh, with respect to India, given, from what I can see,
it looks like there has been no investment in, uh, direct,
uh, increase in diplomatic capacity there in India.
From what I could see at least,
Uh, well before Mr.
Perles, uh, uh, has answered the question for you,
Carl could just say this, that,
am I satisfied with the vote?
Well, I, the primary question said, no, I'm not.
Uh, 'cause we need to do far more, uh, allow the Ian
Singapore, uh, um, Celtic tiger example of
what happens when you put more effort into it.
But that said, uh, it,
the world's just dramatically changed in front of us,
and, uh, all of a sudden our interest
or in India is noticed.
This is no nonsense.
But, uh, went personally, I didn't go my first trip I went
to, uh, for a number of reasons.
Um, but, uh, at that time we spoke
to others you've never in the past made contact with, but
because of the change circumstances,
they were interested in spending far more
time with us than before.
But perhaps, uh, we couldn't answer the question.
Uh, yeah. So just on India specifically, um, I,
I was there last week for the, uh, for the negotiations
and, um, there's been a, a real ramping up of the,
um, of the work with India.
So we've had a, a full first round.
We've had a number of intercessions, um,
by video conference, uh, more than 400 meetings now
with the Indians in the various chapter
parts of the negotiation.
So the negotiation is really in two parts.
There's the disciplines and rules of the agreement,
and there's the market access piece,
and we've focused in on the,
the 19 chapters that we have to negotiate.
And then, uh, at the same time, in parallel,
we're focused on the market access commitments,
which are not just in goods, but also in services.
Uh, which is a, another rising, um, area of interest for us
with the, um, with the Indian colleagues.
I think one of the, one of the observations
to make is the minister said is that, um,
India has become a central player now,
including in the trade area.
Everyone is wanting to negotiate, uh, with India
until relatively recently, uh, they had not done, uh,
many free trade agreements,
but over the last year, uh, well,
actually over the last three years,
they've really ramped up.
So they've finished a negotiation with Australia.
Uh, they finished a negotiation
with the United Arab Emirates.
They finished a negotiation with the Floc, Norway,
Switzerland, Iceland, uh, and Liechtenstein in Switzerland.
Uh, and they are in negotiations with, uh, a number
of our key competitors, Chile, Peru, uh,
but they are also crucially in negotiations
with the European Union and the United States.
And they've also finished a, an agreement recently with the,
with the United Kingdom,
they've announced substantive conclusion of negotiations.
So this is a, this is a really important negotiation for us,
and that we need to, uh, kind of make progress on.
It's not just in the trade area, of course, it's
that wider relationship that we need to build
that you would've seen, uh,
during the Prime Minister's visit there.
But in terms of our, uh, focus, I mean, the big challenge
with India is, um, it is a,
it has very high levels of protection.
So to give you some examples, um, in dairy,
the protection range from 30 to 60%.
And to make the observation that actually in none
of the free trade agreements that India has negotiated,
have they ever, uh, given any access on dairy?
So not with the British, not with the Australians,
and certainly not with Switzerland.
Norway and the colleagues from on sheet meat.
Um, there's a 30% tariff.
Uh, they did give, uh, Australia
tariff free access on sheet meat,
and we've seen a real shift.
Uh, we've, our trade has declined, uh,
and Australia's has nearly doubled in sheet meat
alone, admittedly off a low base.
But nevertheless, the, the facts speak for themselves.
Horticulture, the average tariff on horticultural products
ranging from kiwi fruit through to apples, is
between 50 and 60%.
So these are colossal barriers.
Um, and again, to take apples, uh,
the Indians have never given anyone access, uh, in apples,
not to the Australians, not to the British.
And they're determined that they won't give access to, uh,
other partners there either.
Seafood, the tariffs 30 to 50%, uh, that is a high,
it's a high value market for New Zealand,
but we are tiny in there.
And the tariff is a significant barrier.
And the Australians do have improved access,
uh, there as well.
So if you look across, uh, honey's, another good example,
um, it's a, again, a really high value market, particularly
for the manga, uh, honey, it's a 60% tariff there.
And again, India has never given access to anyone.
Not the British, not the Australians, uh, not the
after colleagues, not the UAE.
So for all of these reasons, this is going
to be a very difficult, uh,
and challenging negotiation to look to advance.
Um, but we have, uh, really focused in on this.
So we have another round coming up, uh, in July,
and I expect every month we will be in a rolling negotiation
process with, uh, with India.
But it's really important to see India just
as one part of the strategy.
Uh, so there's the Ft A with India,
but there's also the work that we've done, um,
with the United Arab Emirates,
which the government concluded at Pace nearly broke my team.
Um, but that was done within three months.
Uh, so, and then we also concluded the agreement
with the GC, so Saudi Arabia, Arabia,
and the other colleagues as well.
Those two agreements, if we can get them entered into force
as soon as possible, that adds another 2.6 billion
to our exports, uh,
into the region just for those two alone.
So this is an important part of the building
of resilience strategy that we've got now, uh, in place.
And I'm happy to talk a little bit about
that strategy in more detail.
But just on the India, uh,
and the FDA piece, those are really big
priorities for us at the moment.
Thank you. Yeah. Thank
You, Mr. Chair. Um, just to
start question on that.
Um, given the challenges with these, the market with India,
do you have a rough timeline of how long
you expect this negotiation to take?
Um, or what you'd like it to take? I guess?
So the, these, these things are difficult
and no negotiator is ever gonna put a deadline on it,
although I noticed that the Indians give us
A rough idea what you like.
That's why I rephrase here.
Yes, minister? Yeah. Yes,
Minister. Good answer.
Um, so I mean, maybe to make one observation is
that the Indians put out a press release at the end
of our first, uh, negotiating round, saying they would like
to finish the agreement this year.
Okay. Um, I think there's an important balance to be struck
between equality of what you get.
Mm-hmm. Uh, what is it that's reasonable
to secure in the timeframe that you've got.
Mm-hmm. And what kind of builtin agenda then you prosecute,
uh, as part of your forward, uh, program with,
uh, with those colleagues?
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Steve Abel,
Thank you. Um,
I've got a couple of questions, please minister.
How important do you think is our reputation
for producing a high value natural food product?
In terms of our export markets?
Um, that's been our intense since the first, uh,
frozen cargo meat left New Zealand in the 1880s
To sell ourselves as the producer of the wine products.
So, um, are you aware of the very large growing
non GMO food market globally, particularly in India
and China, and the potential there for providing a, um,
high value non-genetically modified food product?
I'm very much aware of the claims as to the substance.
They don't quite equate.
Do you think there's a risk if the government refuses the
advice of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and trade, that we make trade
and market access risk, uh, an important component
of the Genetech bill currently, uh,
before the select committee?
Uh, well, it's currently
before the select committee, uh, now told us to
take in public and submissions from all sorts of groups and,
and to make sure the very process
that happens at the select committee such
as this process here is transparent and honest
and that people are paid into.
So we're waiting for the outcome.
So you think that the select committee should consider the
advice of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and Trade, that the trade market access risk
is a concern with us. They
Wouldn't be appropriate for the minister
To comment on influencing select committee
Processes? Mr.
Yes, I'd like to be in control of the committee.
Very good. Next question, Walter.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, in terms of our relationship with China Minister, um,
I wanted to ask whether you are happy
that there is sufficient investment for us to, um, develop
that relationship, um, in the coming years?
Just very aware that, uh, in some years past, we haven't,
and there have been quite restricted
ministerial visits to China.
Um, one part of it.
And then of course the Prime Minister
is on his way to China.
And the scope of that, uh, that visit, as far
as I understand, is fairly a narrow focus on trade.
And there has been some suggestion
that there would be benefit in a broader
agenda being discussed.
Um, whether you have any thoughts?
Well, yes, I have a lot of thoughts on that.
First thing that I would really ask people to consider is
to try and think like the Chinese,
because a lot of people don't, don't realize
how long range they are in
their planning and their thinking.
They've never read Chairman Mao's books
or we've read anything about China.
And I kind of think that you don't survive down all those
thousands of years, uh, because you're not a clever people.
So that's the first thing they get my full respect.
The fact that some of us left there 5,000 years ago
will turn this room at least it's neither here nor there.
We never just owned up that.
And even though some thought it was a comedy when I first
said it, 9 9 6 9 5, they laughed at me not laughing.
Now, because the DNA is out there now,
and it's con conclusively proven.
But the other thing is that, uh, you know,
good relationships are based on
respectful differences of opinion.
And I can ate properly submit the answer to my question
by reciting the words of the Chinese ambassador
just the other day in the last 48 hours, saying
how excellent our relationship is.
I've got a question for you, minister, in relation
to the extensive travel you've
undertaken over for the last 18 months.
Really keen to get some insights on the feedback you've
received and the Pacific in particular from that.
And then how, whether you anticipate maintaining that level
of engagement over the coming 18 months as well.
I could tell you one that was rather amazing.
We went up to, uh, Micronesia
and two of the three asked us, uh, what's going wrong?
And we said, what do you mean?
They said, well, we've never seen you before.
Yeah, we've been to the Marshals, but not the two.
And that I was actually, uh, rather alarm
because we are part of the Pacific Islands Forum.
And what we sort of do since then
to use our utilities the cheapest way possible
to assist them to be part
and parcel of the, uh, Longwood engagement.
And I think that's seriously important.
Um, we have a view that the Pacific Islands Forum Forum
is, uh, critical to our foreign policy is critical to,
to a specific policy.
Its centrality is gotta be heightened
and its work's gotta be improved dramatically.
And we've gotta be play a serious role in that.
Um, some of us can reflect on
how in the past there was a Caity about the whole approach.
I regret that it is seriously important now for us
to understand our role.
And, um, the great thing about New Zealand is
that we do understand the Pacific as good
as any other country, uh,
because of our connections in our long experience there.
Um, the second thing about New Zealand is we've always
regarded those countries regardless of their size
as being our equals in the same way
as we expect larger countries to treat us in the same way.
They're starting to have purpose now,
but in the end they've got huge problems which
they need assistance with.
And you have to say, well, some
option doesn't happen happen here from like minor countries.
Where will they go? And how attempting it will be to do, to
resource themselves from somewhere else, perhaps
with not the same intent and interest as we have.
Mm-hmm. There are major challenges there
and it's not gonna be easy,
but, uh, I kind of think that, um,
and that's why we've had these cross-party tours
when we've gone there to try
and understand, ensure that Parliament understands
our critical role when it comes to Pacific Islands Forum.
Um, and also there are countries internationally who want
to help out in the Pacific.
And uh, our job is to convince them the belief
that there's one country you can trust as a partner
of choice on good advisors, and we've gotta earn that.
Right. And that's what we're seeking to do. Mm-hmm.
I mean, it's hard at work.
The hardest work is that the level
of hospitality and it's really tough. Right.
Do you cope well now?
So you've also spent some time in Southeast Asia over the
last 18 months, uh, most recently in the last couple
of days in Indonesia.
Really interested in your insights on the standard
of those relationships
and the opportunity there for New Zealand.
Well, everybody will have their own perception.
This is our of the last return there just a few days ago.
That's been our fourth trip to Indonesia. Mm-hmm.
Um, and it's critically important
because it is quite a rapidly changing country from
what it was to what it is now.
There's staggering, um, changes there.
We happen to be, uh, asked to see the, um,
prime minister's brother.
He's a serious businessman there.
Um, only to find the perception of
what consumers might have
against the reality something else.
He's a Christian, his brother's leader
of Islamic state, and yet he's a Christian.
The corporation is there.
So these, this is enlightening in that sense.
Uh, we have got a lot of work which they'd like to do
with us, particularly
with their understanding of the Pacific.
And they see us as ever since, uh,
they had the Pacific First Pacific Conference,
which we facilitated in Auckland all those years ago.
They see us as a potential partner
of choice when it comes to the Pacific.
They are, after all, they're not without dispute,
but they are after all the country where greatest number
of Middle Eastern people in the world.
Those are the realities. Mm-hmm.
So it's difficult,
but, um, as I say, uh, uh,
everyone will have different perceptions,
but we've upped the focus in Asian,
Southeast Asia in particular for very sound reasons,
and we need to understand how they think.
Um, typically a bit like the Pacific world, uh,
the Asian world is more likely
to tell you in the corridor walking down than
what they tell you in front of the media or anybody else.
Mm-hmm. But we all know that goes mm-hmm.
But it's an understanding nevertheless.
Supplemental costly.
Yeah. Minister, you touched just
before, just thinking about the,
the questions about your engagement overseas.
You touched on the feedback you'd heard in Micronesia when
you turned up to these countries for the first time.
What are you getting? Are you getting feedback from, uh,
foreign ministers, foreign secretaries from other countries
across Europe, across different continents about, uh,
new Zealand's place in the world, or the way we're engaging?
Uh, a lot
of perception internationally is from the movie industry.
A lot of the rings, the are semi, that's their perception.
And it's also an exciting one.
And also from people from business New Zealand, they do,
they don't know
what the acuity about our present circumstances economically
or socially or politically.
But the, uh, overall image of New Zealand is
of a country they'd love to go to one day.
And of course that's great, but we want 'em to come now
if they're terrorists and if
they're trading what the deal now.
So, um, um, the perception is as a result of, you know,
incredible amount of work over decades by
success of administrations
Supplementary Steve Abel.
Um, given your mention of, uh, Indonesia minister,
I wonder, um, what is our position on the right
of the people of West Parkway to self-determination?
Um, the answer to that is that
they live in Indonesia, recognize
part of the Indonesian state.
Um, there are those who, uh, is, uh, not in respect
of this case Mm.
But worldwide who have a alacrity in advocating
for independence and freedom
and everything else until
what they've done has given their people a CFR destiny
to the fourth world, rather from the prison stability
of not perfect circumstances,
but way better than I could have expected in the past
or way better than they'll ever get by themselves.
I can show you a few examples of that which, uh,
are actually failed states.
Uh, the Larry and cry of independence and freedom
and self-government was fantastic
until in the end it built into, said in the early nineties,
it's the economy stupid.
And that goes for all populations and all peoples.
Are you concerned that, um,
west Parkland's not even allowed to fly their flag?
I mean, we would consider that
not reasonable for an expression of,
Well, I know that some of Europe find fly two flags in
this country, my country that I've been a member of
for a thousand years, right.
In my heritage. Yep.
So you, so if a cab country
and a country is flying two flags,
there's not gonna be a country, the united, but you
Wouldn't prohibit. Sorry, Mr.
Abel, the questions do have
to have a link to the
Appropriation. What minus argument
that's,
He mentioned Indonesia, which is why I was, uh,
You're suggesting that seems to be appropriations
imp appeal my case reputation by advocating the vote
for somebody or some kind
of staff flying two or three flags?
No, no. I mean, even if someone flies a flag,
they can be arrested.
You wouldn't expect that to be the
circumstance in New Zealand. Sorry,
Where's the link to the appropriations?
I was, no, it was a link to the comment
the minister made about Indonesia.
Yeah. But a comment about a
country doesn't mean you can just ask
Anything in relation to that country.
Sure. Okay. It does need
to have a link through to the appropriations.
Yes. Look, the trumpet gives an uncertain sound.
Who prepared the battle? We're talking about economic
improvement, changing people's lives, housing, health,
education, and first world wages.
That's my point. Mm. That's what this comes down to.
And everybody's focused, when you're talking about even on
foreign policy should be how will we uplift these people
or the four fundamentals
that unites everybody in, in humanity.
They'll look after their faith and their beliefs
and their sport and their love and art all by themselves.
But on those four things, that's what we wanna do.
Our people and all things that unites us.
All right. Vinci Walters,
Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, contributing to drafting
of emerging international agreements, I feel is one way
that we can make a difference in terms of, um,
growing the rule of law and lean towards human rights.
And I'd commend you minister
for the position you took on the drafting of the crimes,
the New Crimes Against Humanity Treaty,
which New Zealand supported through
to more detailed drafting session.
Um, my question is really around New Zealand's support
of the crime of, uh, gender apartheid being included within
that treaty and whether, uh, there's work
that will be developed on that in this coming year
and whether that will continue to be supported.
Do you mind if I ask, uh, uh, who we go?
Victoria, the expert on this.
Uh, thank you very much, uh, for the question.
Uh, we are participating, um,
actively in those negotiations, uh, in New York.
Uh, we do think that a, uh, treaty on
Crimes against Humanity would fill out the, um, other
core, uh, human rights treaties, um, as
to whether there is, um,
sufficient support for, uh, gender apartheid
to be included is, is not clear at the moment.
Um, we, we have a, um, fairly open perspective on, um,
incorporating, uh, all the elements of, um,
you know, the crimes against Humanity.
Will, um, new Zealand's position be developed pending the
decision of other states also agreeing
that gender apartheid ought to be included?
Or is it a decision that'll be independently made?
I would have to come back to the committee.
Uh, if you are wanting to know more about the specifics of
that negotiation,
Thank you.
You'd like, uh, can I suggest I just, just can I just add
as an appendage, it is very difficult for us to answer
that question until we got
to the finality of what we're talking about.
Yeah. I suppose my question if,
if there is further information
that's available would be whether the assessment is on the
negotiation site
or whether it's on the, um, the legal argument
for the inclusion of the definition.
Potentially a combination of both.
Um, but it would be useful to see New Zealand's assessment
of the legal analysis
of whe whether gender apart apartheid ought
to be included as a crime. If that's
Possible. I would,
um, observe that there is already, uh,
within the context of the International Criminal Reports
jurisdiction quite, uh, significant
and substantial coverage of, uh, uh, most
of the existing elements of crimes against humanity.
So we are not, the international community's not starting
from scratch, so to speak.
Okay.
Just before we finish up on the trade
and diplomacy section, I'm really keen
to get some insight into the progress
on non tariff barriers.
It's a piece of work this committee's had a particular
interest in over the course of this parliament,
and we appreciate there's been some very, uh,
good progress in resolving some of those.
Uh, but there remain ongoing challenges there,
and in the context of looking to double the value
of exports, very keen
to get an update on the progress being made there.
Yeah. So, um, sorry. Yes.
Um, so on on non-tariff barriers.
So this, this is a very broad area
as you know from the, um, briefing.
We provided the, the committee, uh, maybe start
with a classical version of it, um,
that is the barrier at the border.
Um, and those non tariff barriers, we've got a watch list,
194 items are on that watch list of which, um,
125, uh, in the food
and, uh, beverage sector plus, uh, the primary industry.
So those two alone account for the overwhelming bulk of the,
the challenge we face internationally.
And we know that the value of these, um, varies from, uh,
we've got TBS on our list, uh,
that are worth about five to 6 million.
And we've got TBS on our list with some of our big partners
that are in excess of 20 billions in terms of, uh,
the amount of trade that would be unleashed if you could get
rid of that barrier.
So the classical non tariff barrier is the one
that you have, um, at the border, uh,
and tends to be certification requirements.
It can be a packaging requirement, uh, big dealing recently
with a case where the packaging requirement changed
three times in a year.
That's clearly designed to try to keep you out.
Uh, so those are the kinds of things we look
to, to challenge.
Uh, I wanna speak about how we do that in a, in a second,
but just to give you some practical examples of that.
Then there are the standards.
So those are the classical sort of non tariff barriers
that we look at in terms of what they are at the border.
Uh, then we have the barriers that are within the border,
so, uh, domestic regulatory settings,
but also, uh, agricultural subsidies.
Uh, so those kinds of things that have a really, uh,
very significant effect, for example, on prices.
So to take subsidies, um, in the agriculture space alone,
uh, we know that just four economies account for 80%
of all global subsidies that are determined
to be price distorting.
And we know that lowers, uh, global prices for us,
for New Zealand farmers, uh, by up to 14%.
So it is a really significant, uh, non tariff barrier
that we have to grapple with.
Decans did some really interesting research recently showing
that if a 50% cut in EU support for cheese production,
that would translate into an 8% increase in the global price
and therefore return back into, uh,
New Zealand agricultural exporters.
Hmm. So that's another form of those barriers.
Now, there are multiple ways in which we look to deal with,
um, with these barriers.
And the first is of course, very directly.
Um, and so our embassies offshore, uh,
at various points of escalation right through
until the ambassador, you kind
of go in second secretary level, deputy head
of mission level in the ambassador level bilaterally, trying
to find a, a resolution to, uh, to that.
And I know the minister's been directly involved
recently in, uh, one of the challenges we've had on Halal
with, uh, with, uh, Indonesia.
So a longstanding challenge, uh, there.
So those sort of set of escalation points bilaterally.
Uh, that's one mechanism.
The second mechanisms to work as a group.
Uh, so a group of, uh, WTO member states, um,
we might work together in the capital.
So capital X, a group of, uh, embassies will get together
and say, look, we share the same problem.
We need to knock down this barrier,
and there'll be a lobbying effort, uh, that,
that we bring together there.
Then you've got a sort of a further escalation point
where you would say, right,
do we have a free trade agreement with that partner?
Now, it's really important to remember that one of the
critical pieces of our job is not just the negotiation
of the free trade, but it's the implementation
and the enforcement of the agreement.
And that implementation
and enforcement is a really important part
of the work that the ministry does.
And, uh, particularly in my group, but not only in my group.
Also in terms of what we, uh, do offshore.
So all of the agreements
that we have have something called the goods committee.
Many of them also have an additional, uh,
working group on non tariff barriers.
That is a formal legal mechanism within this international
treaty that we've negotiated that allows us to raise
and obliges our counterpart to respond to a problem
that we're experiencing at the border.
We are very active users of those mechanisms.
So one of the benefits that we see from these agreements is
that big partners, we go in at the embassy level,
uh, nothing really happens,
but we then use this legal architecture that we have.
And in many of our agreements, for example, Ian, Australia
and New Zealand Free Trade Agreement
and CBTP, there are obligations within, in the case
of CBTP, within 30 days in the case of the Ian Australia,
New Zealand FDA, within 45 days to respond in writing
to your query.
And then there's an additional step, which is then used,
which is to meet, uh, and that can be virtually
or in person in a committee structure with all
of our other colleagues, whether it's in CPTP
or whether it's in, in, again,
to tackle those non tariff barriers.
Now, what we find is that, uh, that sort of peer, uh,
kind of review process, when people have to appear in front
of a committee to explain these barriers, that often has a,
what we call the Dracula effect.
Sunlight is shone on it,
and we find that the, uh,
the non tariff barrier starts to wither.
So the free trade agreements are there.
Uh, the other mechanism we have is the SPS
and the technical barriers for trade committee at
the World Trade Organization.
We're one of the highest users of that mechanism.
We're in the top 3% of using, uh, those committees
to ask questions of other countries.
And we do that without fear
or favor, whoever it is, whether it's Indonesia,
whether it's European Union, uh, whether it's Japan.
Uh, we've raised, uh,
our concerns about these non tariff barriers that are there.
And sort of in terms of our sort of next steps
that we're doing, one of the things that, um,
we are now doing is we are gonna create a new unit, uh,
because of the, the pernicious nature
of all of these non-trads.
We're creating a new unit within, uh,
the trade economic group within the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and Trade to really step up our work in
support of, um, uh, business here.
So the implementation piece is one part.
There's also legal enforcement, uh,
and that is another really important dimension
that we're now increasingly reaching into the toolbox for,
uh, when we find that people are not, um, uh, delivering or,
or, or we think they're actually cheating us in terms
of their legal obligations to us through these treaties.
A good example of that is, uh, our friends from Canada, uh,
where we have taken a dispute against them, not
through the WTO, but through the C-P-T-V-P, uh,
and we are now working through.
So we won that case. The panel found in our favor,
there's been an appeal process, uh,
and now we're in the process of working with candidates
to ensure that it fully implements the agreement.
And as a G seven economy, of course, we have no doubt
that they will, um, fully implement, um,
the findings of the panel.
Uh, and I expect a resolution to, to happen,
uh, reasonably swiftly.
The amount of trade that's at stake there is between 45
and 120 million, uh, 16 tariff rate quotas
that the Canadians have used and now view,
and in the view of the panel, uh, abused as a way
to restrict our, our access.
So again, another non tariff barrier,
but another of those mechanisms
that we've got in our trade agreements to try
to, uh, change that.
So something very powerful for a small state, uh,
against some of these bigger players out there. Very
Good. So making good
progress, but challenges remain.
That's good. Excellent.
Move On to The next section
then. I
should have said that much.
Okay. So inter International Development Cooperation.
Uh, first question on thank
You, Mr. Chair. Minister,
I note your comments at the beginning
around, uh, looking toward our good friends, uh,
now close Neighbor Australia and where we view
and look into the Pacific and operate within the Pacific.
I wonder though, um, how the, the challenge
of a reduction in the IDC reconciles
with your comments made earlier
and the view of our Australian friends about, uh,
a perception there with respect to the reduction of
that funding in the IDC answer.
I'm happy to minister. Yes, minister. I'd love to.
Um, I think, uh, I think if we step back
and look at the whole international development environment,
it's a pretty challenging space at the moment.
Um, uh, we all know in the minister mentioned, uh,
the US actions, but it's not just, uh, what the US is doing.
It is around the world.
So I think there's a wide understanding of just
how challenging the environment is.
I think Australia, uh, was very pleased that
through the last budget
with the additional 100 million going into the IDC baseline,
that means we are able to preserve our, um,
preserve our support for the Pacific.
And that's what Australia in particular wants us to be,
um, focusing on.
So we've had really good engagement, uh, with them on that.
Uh, yeah, maybe just a supplementary on that.
So with the dismantling of U-S-A-I-D,
I think I've heard a lot
of commentary from global health organizations about the
lack of that health injection in
particular into the Pacific.
And so I wonder whether some, uh, whether projections
of being, uh, done over the forecasting five year period
to see what the aid gap will look like,
particularly in health,
given the experience we've had in relation to the pandemic.
Um, but in terms of preventable, preventable diseases, so
for example, um, HIV AIDS and PNG
and Fiji, which I know is a particular concern,
are there projections in terms
of us growing our focused attention in that space?
Okay. Yeah. Uh, so I think in terms of the US fund,
we're still waiting for the outcome of their reviews.
I think it's probably quite important to sort of remember
that we need that to land
and we certainly have been engaging with the US to
just encourage them to understand the importance of
what they are delivering into our region and also into south
and Southeast Asia as well.
Um, we've done some looking to see
where the gaps might be and including
therefore to see how we might respond.
The US isn't a major bilateral funder into the Pacific,
but of course it is a major funder
of the multilateral system, which I think is
what you were getting to.
And so that is a delivery partner piece.
So that is, that is what we are working through now
and working through very closely with Australia
and other kind of colleagues around the world.
Um, health is a really, it's a really critical one.
And, and you're right, whether it be HIV, whether it be, um,
uh, polio and Papua New Guinea, uh, at the moment
that we are constantly monitoring, uh, and responding to,
but when we look at that or when we set priorities, we try
and do that in combination with our partner country as well
as to what they want us to be focused on.
So I think there's still just a lot of questions about
actually the development system and kind of what comes next
and therefore where these, where these gaps are.
And while I'm focused, I guess particularly on our region,
we know, um, we know that Africa is, you know,
particularly concerned for, you know, their region.
Yeah. It is kind of everywhere around the world.
So it's a, it's a tough space.
There's a big international conference coming up in, um,
our first week of July on, um, financing for development.
So that's gonna be probably quite a clearing house for all
of us getting together and working out, just kind of
where, where things are sitting.
So just to clarify, I think this is a yes,
but does the bulk of the funding go
through bilateral streams of funding for the Pacific,
or is a proportion of it through multilateral institutions
Proportions, through multilateral.
The bi, the majority of our funding goes through bilateral
or through Pacific Regional programs,
but we do fund the multilateral system as well,
and for that, we, we ask them to particularly prioritize
what they deliver in the Pacific.
Yeah.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, with respect to, uh,
the way we support, develop, uh, the welfare
of developing countries, of the focus on the Pacific,
I wonder minister, if you've got a view towards the
workforce migration challenge in the Pacific in particular,
knowing full well that New Zealand is often a destination,
uh, or even a dare I say it, a pathway for, for
that the migration of that workforce to other countries.
Um, I wonder minister if, if, with a view towards how
that impacts on the economic development of the Pacific
and what can New Zealand do about that?
That's a fascinating question
because, you know, we started the seasonal workers scheme in
2007 and has been critically important to New Zealand
and also critically important to those countries in it.
And our job is to ensure that the scheme works
properly in every respect.
Um, now that said, as we are trying to do the job
that you are saying, um, population retention
is a paramount concern of the Pacific.
Correct. And so we, before we rush to comment
or judgment sometimes here, we need to talk
to the local politicians, their leaders of Ians as to
what their views are because it's
very, very difficult for them.
Uh, when you consider that, you know, new ways.
And now about on a good day, 1100
or 1300, uh, cook Islands is down on a good day,
11, 12,000.
Um, uh, they have, uh, as I said,
um, got a certain economic capital level, which is, I credit
to New Zealand, I don't care what anybody says,
it's a serious credit for this country.
Um, but also there's, um, they're all saying,
but the grass has always been, uh,
somewhere else applies to the Pacific as well.
And the Pacific leadership is very concerned
about their population retention.
So in that consideration, we have tried to look
with new eyes at what resources they might have
that they're not exhausting to the max.
And I think that really has to be a, a serious consideration
and often thought that at a former time
that we had a far too short,
almost like a bank arrangement about the return
of a development program having to be five years or less.
I mean, this is hopeless when it come
to some Pacific Island countries, it had to be longer.
Uh, all I'm saying is in 2025, we are looking with the,
the use of our past experience,
but also trying to say where can we do far better?
And, um, if you look at it, the, the opportunities, uh,
sometimes only manifest through economic emergency.
The cooks would never have changed if they hadn't had forced
to change to be part of more entrepreneur.
Mm. That's been a dramatic change on that.
Um, the, uh, tourism ratios they've got, uh,
are seriously, um, at credit, the tourism ratios
that new way starting to develop doesn't have
to be much more better than
that than they're doing extraordinary.
Well, but again, um, when you answer the question,
uh, it has so many facets to it that I hesitate
to make any try to type of comprehensive answer than to say,
perversely, sometimes you look
and say, if the Japanese were on that island,
or if the China's on that island, what would they do?
Because it's culture and, uh, different attitudes. Mm-hmm.
It's not a racial thing, it's culture.
And um, um,
all we can do is do the best we possibly can, uh,
alongside them and then ensure that
economic resilience means an improved, uh,
income base for them going forward.
But these are not, in many cases, so wealthy economies.
Mm-hmm.
Do you have some insights into areas
where we potentially might, uh,
there might be some lower hanging fruit
or some easier opportunities to try
and support more economic growth in some
of those Pacific nations?
Particularly when we're looking at how we can
maximize the efficiency of our IDC
into the Pacific at a time when, you know,
there are budgetary pressures everywhere.
Yeah. They kind of throw fisheries in there as an example.
Well, fisheries yeah. Fisher is a great example.
You know, we gotta do as much as we can there.
And also when it comes to fisheries,
maximize the whole fish, not waste so much of it.
Mm-hmm. Uh, I mean, Iceland is a classic example.
They use 100% of the fish. So, so should we be doing it?
Um, dare I said, I hate to rush
and preach to the Pacific Islands of the Pacific peoples
because I think my own country's making the same mistake.
It's not maximizing its resources. Yeah.
On That. Sure. Yes.
Thank
You. Mr. Chair. Just a
sub on that.
Do you think there's opportunity for New Zealand to work
with our Pacific partners around them gaining market access?
Um, whether it's like working on some free
trade agreements together?
Because I do think part of their prosperity is attached
to the fact that they're unable to access the same kind
of things that we can.
And that could be because they have do brick
labeling, all kinds of things.
Mm-hmm. Um, but I see that maybe
that could be a way in which they could further
what the economic situation on violence.
Yes. Um, agree.
And there's a, there's a couple of, uh, pieces to that.
One is the, the pacer plus agreement.
So the sort of the Pacific wide agreement, which we've been,
um, very strong supporters of.
And it's not a traditional FTA, it is a way
of actually trying to provide more, more support
and more development to those countries to help them.
And then we also do things like, um,
and I should say on Pacer Plus, the big thing
that we're working on at the moment is to try to try
to persuade Fiji and Papua New Guinea to join.
'cause that will then really give the heft to the agreement,
the two big economies of the region.
So making progress,
but you know, you don't wanna, don't want
to, um, cash that in too quickly.
Um, the other thing we do is some individual, um, projects,
whether that be to, uh, assist farmers with better, um,
uh, better crop sustainability, better, um, reliability
of growing through to at the other end of helping, um,
helping with the fumigation
and other things in order for those products.
Um, for example, watermelons from Tonga to be able
to be exported into New Zealand
to meet those market security or biosecurity requirements.
So that is, there's a lot, but there's a lot more.
And one of the challenges that some
of our Pacific countries have
because of their limited scale is the ability to be able
to do the regular supply that helps, you know, that means
that they would be a viable suppliers
who are supermarket chain.
But there is, there is, um, uh,
quite a lot of work in that space.
And other areas, I think in the economic development space,
where we have been focusing is
probably in our infrastructure space
really around connectivity.
'cause if we don't have connectivity, then it kind
of doesn't matter how brilliant they might be growing
something, it's not gonna get there.
Mm-hmm. So whether that be through, um, airfield in, um,
new way or Cooks or Solomon Islands to help, um, help that.
And then also digital connectivity as well.
So sort of trying to assist countries to be able
to actually participate more into the global economy.
Our next question online from Tiano Ano,
Uh, Ian from Zoom here, uh, it's actually a sub.
Uh, and I was interested in around, um, uh, what the,
the nimbleness and the flexibility, um, uh, in, in the IDC,
uh, and particularly in the context of the comments, uh,
announcements made from the US about the impacts
on travel bans, uh, onto, uh, Vanuatu and Tonga.
And whether there is robustness in the
system to actually deal with that.
Uh, or if you have any other reflections, um,
about the impact, um, on, on that, on the impact of that.
Um, there has been some
precipitate comment on this matter.
Look, there's 60 days for this matter
to be, uh, resolved.
Um, there have been problems which you would be
pretty, um, um, corrected to assume
such as overstaying, such as, um, um,
passport sales sort of fundamentals which have a degree
of innocence, uh, in the domestic Pacific setting.
But in the international setting
will be of concern to the United States.
Uh, we are not, uh, how shall I say,
panicking on this matter.
What we are saying is that we will do our best to work
with our Pacific neighbors
and with the United States to see if we can
help resolve this matter.
But to rush and think that something, uh,
outrageous has happened here when there has been
overstaying and let's fix it.
We have copi problem with overstaying in this country.
And if you examine it, most people that over stay,
not Pacific Islanders, they happen to be
white people from some other part of the world
who just like it and keep on staying here.
That was the reality when I had us did my assessment.
And so this is not unusual to happen.
Uh, and I think that if we can talk to, uh, the Americans
and identify the key points of their concern,
then it's resolvable.
But let's, um, ensure we do it in a, in a way
that the, the Pacific countries understand their level
of concern in a country where the question of
wrongful immigration
or illegal immigration is a massive issue.
We'll, we're all on notice yet.
And so I think we can say, don't panic, uh, let's deal
with it and understand how something that may have the,
uh, origins of innocent genesis of innocence originally, uh,
have presented very badly
when they've landed in another country.
Thank you. Thank you for that answer.
Do you have a timeline about discussions you're gonna have
with ATU in terms of getting their, what they,
you know, what, what their kind of, um,
thoughts are on, on this issue?
Well, I think we are share, we are currently sharing
what our views are about how this may have arisen.
That there's not, there's sort of collateral
to the big issue coming out of Latin America.
Uh, and that collateral is, has affected them now.
But I, we'll quickly go through our sies
and talk to them all and see if we can help out
in talking to the Americans as well.
FCI Walters, Um, mine was
as such just back on the investment issues
and the Pacific region
and whether, uh,
looking at the world bank's low interest right.
Loan, uh, structures has been something that we have
or will look into.
I understand that sometimes they can match countries so
that you have a more developed nation there as well.
And I, I agree with the focus on, uh, interconnectivity.
I would also say energy
and energy generation is somewhere
that could be mutually beneficial to New Zealand
if we were able to access, uh, w uh, world Bank Line.
Yeah. And just on that last point, you, you're spot on.
Yes. Energy is another big focus of it,
particularly the shelter to Yeah, exactly.
The cost of shipping oil up
to run diesel generators and things.
That's right. Is um, is uh, pretty distressing.
Yeah, actually. Um, so that is,
that is a big focus, um, of the program.
I'm pleased to say in terms of the World Bank, yes,
we do work particularly with the World Bank
and even more so with the Asia Development Bank, uh, on
how do we basically leverage them And picking up a point
that the minister has been directing us to do is
how do we get additional funding into the region?
And the multilateral development banks are quite often a
good way of doing that because they are
kind of safe lenders.
They, as you said, they have low interest rates,
they are going to put structural reform around things.
And so we do partner with them, uh,
a reasonable, a reasonable amount.
Um, so we invest in the banks in order to be able
to leverage much greater amounts out
of the banks into the region.
And we'll, we'll keep doing that,
Including it looking, sorry, including it,
looking at pro projects like, uh, offshore wind for example,
which just feel to me like they would need a much longer
term horizon in terms of investment
and potentially make sense of
that risk can be born across multiple countries
who are island nations.
Yeah. That that'd be the sort of thing
that we would talk about with the partner government to say
what, you know, kind of what are your priorities
and if that is one of them, whether the World Bank was an
option, whether the a DB, whether that would be one
that would be so significant that we'd probably want to try
and club finance with a range of countries.
Like we are doing an energy program, uh,
in Vanuatu at the moment, which the French are partnering
with us on, um, as well as the Asia Development Bank.
So to try to, try to broaden the base of, um, of,
uh, finance into the region.
Thank you.
Ernest. I'm just interested in your insights on
the delivery of aid, uh, particularly
around the Pacific region.
You, me, you mentioned earlier there's a number of parties,
a number of states now with increasing interest in the
region, uh, that are providing aid
for a range of different reasons.
We do some amazing work there.
The privilege of seeing that, thank you.
Um, but interested in the speed at which we're able
to deliver that and whether
or not there is potential for further efficiency gains
and how we can respond
or demonstrate responsiveness in the country in the context
of Pacific Partners potentially looking
or having other options on the table.
How do we ensure that we are, uh,
not just a trusted partner, I think we are, uh,
but that we are able
to deliver those needs in a timely manner
and do have confidence we're there at the moment?
Well, that's seriously a very comprehensive question.
And, uh, it's an obligation for all of us to ensure
that we are living, uh, value for money
and getting the maximum out of it in a way that, uh,
is long term sustainable and resilient.
It makes sense. Uh,
and this is always difficult in, in certain environment
and, uh, we who are walk into the Pacific
with an understanding of our country's origins
and know many in many ways what the problem will be.
It is infrequently the lack of the understanding
of their cultural obligations.
It's about service starts there, it ends there, service up
and down, loyally, up and down.
And when you see that failure,
you start seeing the misappropriation a, uh, of aid funds
and the misuse of it, and it's
catastrophic and it's sad to see it happen.
And we should know a bit about it
'cause we've seen a bit of a now country where the um, uh,
uh, understanding of what Ang means is completely, um, got
so perverse that everybody thinks they've got it.
Uh, and yet out in the Pacific, uh,
we're not so different in that context.
The great leadership of the Pacific was based on the, um,
uh, absolute commitment
and service to one's people at all levels
and literally on, up and down on that basis.
And when you see it,
you can almost identify those personalities when it fails,
he should be on red earth and ensuring that you are
and, uh, uh, auditing
and making, uh, the level
of accountability be part of the process.
'cause that was always the deal.
We are here to aid
and help your people, not you, you know,
when your view is, uh,
and not an unusual one
that if you can't help your young people who can only help,
which is a standard of performance,
that's one way of looking at it.
But it's only a cigarette between paper between that
and corruption, if you see my point.
And so our job, if you've got any understanding
of the Pacific, is to respect them
and respect their, the culture and respect their, um,
dare I say that word called Tik.
'cause it'll be localized there to respect their Tik,
but it make sure it happens
and not, is not averted by some opposing
as one culture while taking on the worst, uh, um, evils
of the west, some western cultures.
Tiano ano,
Uh, thank you. Thank you. I was
Talking about you Tiana.
Thank you for that. Uh, I, I, I have a Christian
around humanitarian, um, humanitarian aid
and the funding that we provide to, um,
to the absolute disaster that's happening in Gaza.
And I wonder if you could give us an, an update
with what's happening here
and acknowledging, uh, that statements were made for
by a number of governments around the block adding
of aid into, into Gaza.
So I wanted to to know what's happening there in terms of
is it getting to them on one hand
and the other hand, what are the other kind of actions that
you might be considering in, in terms of making sure that,
you know, the food gets to where it needs to get to?
Uh, perhaps if I can get Paula Wilson, uh, who, you know,
Deanna, uh, perhaps I can get Paula Wilson
to answer you good, Paula?
Sure. Um, thank you for the questions.
The question as I understand it, let me just clarify,
was about whether humanitarian aid is getting into Gaza now,
what the situation is around Yeah,
Yeah. Our, our
contribution, our contribution to humanitarian aid,
um, going to Gaza as it, you know, as it getting there.
Um, and then the second part of it is,
so I know the statements were made, uh, directed at Israel
around blockhead of, of aid and Gaza.
And the next steps from there, given that they're not,
So in terms of the current situation,
Israel did have a complete blockade onto aid into Gaza
for a couple of months that has now been lifted.
It's still quite restricted in terms
of getting the assistance in there.
We have provided more than $37 million worth
of humanitarian assistance.
The question of whether it's getting through,
I think you would see on television as we do
that there are still real issues with aid delivery there.
Um, but we are encouraging Israel as often as we can,
including in the last week
and supporting a United Nations general assembly resolution
that was trying to push Israel to improve the speed
and the amount of humanitarian assistance that's getting in.
Very good. Thanks for that.
Final question on this section. Tim Koler.
Thanks, minister. Just in terms of, I mean,
I guess leading on from that, um, thinking of that sort
of security development nexus, if there's no security,
there's no development, there's no aid,
but equally there's a number of countries we could point to.
If there's no aid, there's no security.
When we reflect on our new Zealand's aid program,
particularly around the Pacific, uh,
are we considering security outcomes that we're looking for?
Are we working alongside, I don't know, minister of defense,
uh, in some of those aims that we're looking for,
particularly when we look at sort
of future stability in the Pacific?
Or is it a purely sort of altruistic aid program
That Trump
Yes. Sorry.
It's, that's a rather
All embracing questions. Perhaps
you could, you could answer
As a competent minister, that's,
Well, it's, it's covered. I've
gonna be another free hours.
I'm gonna be, anyway, I promise I'll keep it short.
Um, uh, look, yes, yes. Uh, it, it's kind of, it is both.
Uh, so part of our, um, priorities that we have got set
for the Pacific program is around security.
And as you know, the Pacific takes a very broad definition
of security, um, whether it be climate security
through the traditional security,
but yes, we do through the development program, we fund,
um, policing programs.
There's dog detector programs through a range of reasons.
Our regions, there are quite a lot
of different activities in that kind
of the more security end of it.
But there are some limits as to what you can do
with the development program and development funding.
So there is also a range of other activities that, um,
that defense does themselves,
or we work in partnership with them around the region.
Um, whether it be through say a tropic twilight, uh,
exercise, for example, through, um,
leadership development centers
where we can, we can do part of it.
And then defense can help train the sort of the future
military leaders of the region.
So it's, it's a, it's a real mix.
We try to work as closely
as we can across all New Zealand government agencies.
There's about 36 New Zealand government agencies
who operate in the Pacific.
Uh, and so coordinating
and trying to maximize the impact that we have as kind
of one New Zealand Inc.
Uh, is a, is quite a big focus for us.
Right. We'll move into the final section on Antarctica
honor chair.
Uh, minister, we note that, um,
The institute has been tasked with looking towards
some $50 million through private sponsorship.
A double a two-prong question.
The first one is, are you confident
that they'll be able to source that?
And the second part of that is,
given the strategic competition of Antarctica, are we
satisfied or you satisfied, sorry, minister,
that the processes are put in place to ensure
that in the process of seeking that private sponsorship,
there is no coercion
and that there is no foul play
for one type of description?
Yeah, I think the only question of ensuring that the
potential donor is, uh, comes with clean hands.
Mm. Uh, it is a fair question,
but, you know, um, rather it's embarrassment,
you looking gift horse in the mouth,
that question about the integrity.
So this is gonna be a very close exercise,
but we've also gone international in that context to say
to some countries, you know, this is an important part
of the world, do you wanna be part of it going forward?
And there is an interest that we intend to cultivate, um,
member that any donor here, uh,
would be advantaged by the New Zealand tax laws.
Mm-hmm. And so if we can't
persuade enough New Zealanders, I'd be somewhat surprised.
We just need to be, uh, be selling it better.
Um, we're an unusual country in that context.
Uh, we have had some, you know,
serious international achievements,
but we do very little about celebrating it.
Uh, make no bones about it.
I was stunned to find that I was the first minister to go
to Nepal to see Hillary working that.
I mean, I was actually shocked to find that out.
Not in a and, uh, in modest way.
Just shocked to think how could that
enormous performance have been followed up
by its total commitment to those people and their education
and their health and things like that be met with such, um,
well, uh, response from New Zealand, but maybe it's
'cause we're so far away that we that not paying attention
and in Tica we've got a good record there.
We are very well, well respected there,
but we've long been known as skewers.
You know what a skewer is, it goes along, it's
what leftovers of everybody else.
We don't want that reputation anymore.
We want to have a decent building of long one going
for the next, uh, half century or longer
and respectful input because, uh, we have proximity to that
and a record again that we, uh, should be proud of.
Will we get the money? Um, well I show up, we're working,
doing upmost to get it as fast as possible
On that. I understand there's,
um, good progress being made, uh,
with a main contractor having just been decided
recently, our team McGinness.
Uh, but also in terms
of the ongoing work upgrading the wind farm, uh,
perhaps just some insight in the progress on
where the wind farm's at, in particular as part
of our broader contribution to, uh,
the relationship in particular
between us and the US down there.
Well, before we get an answer as a full Mr.
Minister, we got the first wind farm down
there and I'm very proud of that.
Okay. Uh, here we are now in 2025
and waiting for an update that you could tell us.
Um, thank you for the question.
Uh, the work is progressing well,
but there have been some technical challenges, uh,
related to some turbines, um, being damaged on route.
And Antarctic in New Zealand is working
through those challenges to understand what impact
that will have on the, the timeline of the project.
But it's indicative of the challenging environment, uh,
for building projects, uh, that, um, Antarctica is.
Uh, but um, we are, yeah, we are positive, um,
that the wind farm elements are going well.
So is that damage able to be remediated down there
or is there going to be a through,
There's, there are discussions going on with the provider
of the wind turbines, right.
Uh, to ascertain the, the best approach to that.
Okay. Thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, minister, when can we expect to know?
Um, I, I accept that we've named a contractor, um, and,
but the full cost, um, in order
for us over the next financial year, uh, to be able
to measure against what's being achieved,
um, with what's being spent.
Good answer. Uh, the, um,
decisions at the moment that have been taken, uh, to, uh,
have Antarctic in New Zealand present a revised detailed
business case in 2026,
and that business case will be within the funding envelope
of the 498 million.
And, um, we, we, we know they're confident
that they can come up
with a revised detailed business case within that envelope
that delivers on the ongoing needs
for an effective Antarctic base
that can deliver world class science.
I wonder if I mayor Mr.
Chair, um, if, if using Antarctica
as a focal point, but acknowledging all
of our conversation about the challenges geo strategically,
um, is there,
because of our good reputation,
as you've rightly pointed out in our work in Antarctica, is,
is is there any leverage
that we can gain from our reputation there,
working alongside some of those other international partners
that are there with respect to leverage in other spaces
around, uh, the geostrategic competition
that we are finding around movement?
I know it's not quite a vote question, but I
Well it used to be the most critical, uh,
successful example of, uh, our race with the United States
of enormous cooperation record down in Antarctica.
But perhaps you could answer the question.
Yeah. The, um, United States is New Zealand's, um,
premier, um, strategic partner, uh, on, um,
the Ross Sea on Logistics, uh,
using the Christchurch Gateway, uh,
and on world class science.
And um, we have, um, made it clear to the United States
how much we value that ongoing partnership.
The annual, um,
Antarctic treaty consultative meeting is happening, uh,
next week, uh, in Milan.
And uh, we are pleased to see that the US is continuing
to participate and will be in Milan, uh,
with a delegation of experts.
So we will have further co discussions
with them in the margins of, of that meeting.
And we know, uh, uh, joint
and tactic programs, the National Science Federation
for the US and uh,
Antarctic in New Zealand are in regular contact.
Very good. Can I, sorry, can I add Mr Chair?
Um, the point about the geostrategic competition is,
is a really important one.
Um, and we, we know the Antarctic is not immune from the
same pressures we are seeing
play out in other parts of the world.
So as well as doing everything we can, uh, in the ways
that Victoria said in terms of working
to strengthen the Antarctic treaty system,
we're also looking at other partners we might work
with in that context as well.
So, um, we completed, um, science corporation arrangements
where the UK and Chile, for example, uh, in the last year
and I think Antarctica, New Zealand as well has done, um,
their own science sort of MOUs with the UAE and and Germany.
So I think your point about being able to look at whether
or not there are other parties we can continue to work with
to strengthen our interests in preserving that system,
which is very important to us, um, is, is one that we are,
we are addressing. Thank
You. Alright, that brings us
to an end for today's session.
Uh, can I just finish by thanking you, minister
for your time and thanking the ministry
for all the great work I doing on behalf of New Zealand,
both here and offshore?
Yeah, and look, I can I just say thank you
to the committee and those members who have joined us on,
uh, those specific trips.
So now, uh, we might have something better coming up
for you very, very soon.
We would love. Very good. Hey, we look forward to it.
I'll it a mystery.
Just tell us short all I love it.
No, we'll, uh, actually both.
Oh, excellent. Wow. What a finish to the
Meeting.
He just wants to get invited back.